Who it’s for: People who want the latest in iPhone technology but don’t want to spend a thousand dollars for it.

Why we like it: Apple’s iPhone 11 offers almost everything someone might want in an iPhone, at a relatively affordable price. It’s as fast as any other model, and the battery will last all day through normal use. The cameras are excellent, especially with the Night Mode feature, which makes what would be otherwise unusable low-light photos look legitimately good. And the large screen is great for watching videos, playing games, or just scrolling through Twitter.

The iPhone 11 uses the same basic design introduced with 2017’s iPhone X: It has an edge-to-edge screen, Face ID, and no Home button. Its aluminum and glass body is available in three beautiful pastel colors, as well as a vibrant red version, black, and white. We received a number of compliments on the green and purple versions of the phone during early testing, before many people had had a chance to see them in person.
Closeup of the iPhone 11 cameras.
The iPhone 11 has a wide-angle lens and an ultra-wide-angle one, but no telephoto, so it can't optically zoom. Photo: Michael Murtaugh

Flaws but not dealbreakers: Some Android phones may offer additional features at this price, but if you’re sure you want an iPhone, we think the iPhone 11 offers Apple’s best combination of price and features. Unlike with past midrange iPhones, we don’t have any caveats or drawbacks (such as a battery that won’t last all day) to note here. Although the much more expensive iPhone 11 Pro offers some upgraded features, they’re not necessities that you’ll miss on the iPhone 11.
Also great, if you like smaller screens: iPhone SE (2nd generation)
The iPhone SE against a purple background.
Photo: Andrew Cunningham
Also great
Apple iPhone SE (2nd generation) 64 GB

Who it’s for: Those who prefer smaller screens, want to spend less on a phone, or would rather have a fingerprint reader than Face ID.

Why we like it: The iPhone SE (2nd generation) brings modern features and hardware to Apple’s smallest and least expensive phone—it has a fast processor so apps feel snappy, as well as a good camera, water resistance, wireless charging, and other modern features. It costs less than half of what an iPhone 11 Pro does, and the 128 GB storage upgrade costs only $50 more than the base 64 GB model.

Flaws but not dealbreakers: The iPhone SE’s smaller screen may feel cramped, especially if you’ve been using an edge-to-edge iPhone X–style phone. Low-light photos simply don’t look as good as those shot on the iPhone 11 because there’s no Night Mode. And the iPhone SE’s battery isn’t the longest lasting; if you’re not a heavy user, it should survive throughout the day without your having to recharge it, but otherwise you may want to keep a charger or wireless charging pad handy.

If the iPhone 11 or the iPhone SE doesn’t sound right for you, or if you’d just like to know more about the full range of iPhones that Apple currently sells, read our full guide to which iPhone you should get.
The best Android phones: Google Pixel 3a and 3a XL
The Google Pixel 3a resting on a light wood surface.
Photo: Ryan Whitwam
Our pick
Google Pixel 3a
Google Pixel 3a
Best Android smartphone

The best version of Android with guaranteed updates through May 2022, plus class-leading camera performance, makes the Pixel 3a feel as good as phones that cost twice as much.
Google Pixel 3a XL

Who they’re for: People who want a fast, secure Android phone with the best camera and guaranteed software updates but who don’t want to spend a thousand dollars.

Why we like them: The Google Pixel 3a and Pixel 3a XL have a lot in common with the previous year’s flagship Pixel 3 and 3 XL. They come in two sizes (5.6 and 6 inches, respectively), they have a clean, fast build of Android with three years of guaranteed monthly updates (through May 2022, in the case of the two 3a models), and they offer camera performance that surpasses what we’ve seen from any other phone we’ve tested short of Google’s own Pixel 4 series. But the 3a and 3a XL cost half as much as the Pixel 4 and 4 XL, and although they aren’t quite as feature packed as the premium models, most people wouldn’t notice the handful of missing features.

Google equipped the Pixel 3a with the same 12.2-megapixel rear camera as it did the more-expensive Pixel 3 in 2018, and even two years later they’re still some of the best cameras you can find in an Android phone. Google’s HDR+ captures impressive detail while also compensating for poor lighting. The AI-powered digital zoom is almost as good as the optical zoom on phones with dedicated telephoto lenses. There’s also Night Sight, which uses longer exposures to take impressive photos with very little light.
The Google Pixel 3a and 3a XL side by side on a wood surface, to show their relative sizes.
The Pixel 3a XL resembles the 3a but has a 6-inch screen and a larger battery. Photo: Ryan Whitwam

Both versions of the 3a use 1080p OLED displays, and they’re much nicer than the LCD screens you normally see on other phones in this price range. You should get whichever size is more comfortable for you to hold—the 3a XL is quite large, but it’s lighter than many big phones thanks to its plastic body. The 5.6-inch 3a is comfortable even for people with small hands, since its tall screen makes the phone narrower and easier to hold.

Flaws but not dealbreakers: The Pixel 3a and 3a XL use Qualcomm Snapdragon 670 processors, which aren’t as powerful as the Pixel 4’s Snapdragon 845 or the Galaxy S10e’s Snapdragon 855. Google’s streamlined software and careful optimization keep the Pixel 3a feeling responsive, but it’s not as fast as the Pixel 4 or Galaxy S10e, and it may feel sluggish sooner. You’re likely to notice it most when playing 3D games and installing apps. The storage, which is limited to 64 GB, isn’t as fast as the storage on more expensive phones. And like other Pixel phones, these models lack a microSD slot for expandable storage.

The OLED screen’s colors and brightness are good, but not top-of-the-line as on the screens for the Pixel 4 and 4 XL, which are easier to use outdoors on a bright day. If it’s raining, the Pixel 3a and 3a XL are also at a disadvantage, as their plastic bodies are not water resistant like those of most modern high-end phones. And they don’t support wireless charging.

To read more about the Pixel 3a and other Android phones we’ve tested, read our full guide to the best Android phones.
Upgrade Android pick: Google Pixel 4 and 4 XL
The Pixel 4 and Pixel 4 XL side by side.
The Pixel 4 (left) and Pixel 4 XL (right) are almost identical, but the XL has a larger, 6.3-inch screen and longer battery life. Photo: Ryan Whitwam
Upgrade pick
Google Pixel 4
Google Pixel 4
A better, more expensive Pixel

The Pixel 4 is the fastest phone we’ve ever tested, and the camera bests that of every other Android phone. It also has guaranteed updates until October 2022. Its battery life is mediocre, but it's water resistant, it supports wireless charging, and it has a glass back rather than plastic.
Google Pixel 4 XL

Who they’re for: People who want an Android phone with wireless charging, water resistance, and a great screen and camera, and who don’t mind paying extra to get those features.

Why we like them: The Google Pixel 4 and Pixel 4 XL—two sizes of the same phone, with 5.7-inch and 6.3-inch screens, respectively—offer the newest, fastest version of Android, the best camera performance of any Android phone, and excellent displays. Google guarantees monthly updates on these phones until October 2022, which is much better than what you can expect from Samsung, LG, OnePlus, or even Android One phones like some of our budget picks. While the Pixel 4 and 4 XL are technically better and more capable than the 3a, they’re also twice as expensive. If you don’t need features such as IP68-rated water resistance, wireless charging, or a smoother, 90 Hz display, the Pixel 3a offers a much better value.

The 2019 Pixel phones offer the best camera performance of any Android phone we’ve ever tested, and in many cases it’s as good as or better than that of Apple’s latest iPhones. Both new Pixel models have a 12-megapixel wide-angle camera and a 16-megapixel 2x telephoto camera on the back, and a single 8-megapixel sensor sits on the front. The front and rear cameras take impressively sharp and accurate shots in any lighting conditions thanks to Google’s HDR+ image processing. Google’s phones have an AI-powered digital zoom that can capture amazing photos with the help of the 2x optical zoom on the secondary camera. Even photos with 8x zoom come out looking almost as sharp as those captured with optical zoom.

The Pixel 4 and 4 XL lack a headphone jack, which is becoming a common omission on high-end phones, though the Pixel 3a phones still have them. Annoyingly, Google does not include a USB-C–to–headphone adapter or a set of USB Type-C headphones as it did with the 2018 Pixel phones. The Pixel 4 also doesn’t offer a microSD card slot as Samsung’s Galaxy S10 series does, so you should buy the 128 GB version (which adds another $100 to the already high cost of the phone) if you’re concerned that 64 GB won’t be enough.

Flaws but not dealbreakers: The main flaw of both the Pixel 4 and 4 XL is that the Pixel 3a and 3a XL offer most of the features people care about—including edge-to-edge screens and excellent cameras—for half the price. The Pixel 4 and 4 XL are still good phones, but by comparison they’re not a great value.

The smaller Pixel 4 also has lackluster battery life; you might find yourself recharging it often to avoid range anxiety. Thankfully, the Pixel phones use the USB-PD standard, so you can get extra 18 W chargers and battery packs cheap.
The best budget Android phone: Nokia 6.2
Budget pick
Nokia 6.2
Nokia 6.2
Great hardware, fast updates

This model offers a bright, vibrant, 6.3-inch 1080p display, as well as two good cameras, solid build quality, and software updates through late 2021. But it doesn’t work on Verizon or other carriers that use CDMA network technology.

Who it’s for: People on a budget who still want a phone that does more than the bare minimum.

Why we like it: Although the Nokia 6.2 costs less than half the price of a modern high-end smartphone, its screen, performance, and camera are good enough that it’s never frustrating to use, even if those features are not as good as what you get in the Pixel 3a. The Nokia 6.2 includes a fingerprint reader and a version of Android that’s pretty close to what Google includes on its Pixel phones. It also offers near-field communication (NFC) for Google Pay and other contactless payments and a USB-C port that’s more convenient and capable of charging the phone more quickly than Micro-USB. And as an Android One device, it will receive fast updates until at least late 2021, two years after its release date—it’s one of the few budget phones that get quick security patches and new versions of Android when they’re released.
The Nokia 6.2 budget android phone, shown in a person's hand.
The Nokia 6.2 is a surprisingly good smartphone at a budget price. Photo: Ryan Whitwam

Flaws but not dealbreakers: The Nokia 6.2 is compatible only with GSM phone networks, which means it’s compatible with AT&T, T-Mobile, and many prepaid phone carriers but not with Verizon, Sprint, or other CDMA networks.

If you’d like to use a CDMA carrier, the Samsung Galaxy A50 is our recommendation, since that model is compatible with everything. It crams a bigger, more vibrant display into a more compact package than the Nokia 6.2. But the A50 is not quite as fast as the Nokia 6.2, and it will get fewer updates on a less consistent schedule.

“You get what you pay for” also applies to the Nokia 6.2 in a few respects: Budget phones have never been good at taking pictures in low light, and more-expensive phones have faster Wi-Fi and cellular technology.

For more information on the Nokia 6.2 and Samsung Galaxy A50, read our full guide to the best budget Android phones.
The cheapest usable option: Nokia 2.3
Budget pick
Nokia 2.3
Nokia 2.3
Basic but usable

The Nokia 2.3 has guaranteed software updates through early 2022, and it’s faster than other phones in its price range. But it lacks a fingerprint sensor and doesn’t support CDMA networks like Verizon or Sprint.

Why we like it: For roughly one-third the price of a Pixel 3a, the Nokia 2.3 offers surprisingly good performance, a decent screen, a large battery, and a version of Android that’s not loaded down with junk apps. And as an Android One phone, it will receive monthly security updates and new Android versions until early 2022, two years after its original release (security updates are usually prompt, but cheaper Nokia phones typically take longer to receive new Android versions than the more expensive phones do).
The Nokia 2.3 budget android phone, shown in a person's hand.
The Nokia 2.3 is the cheapest Android phone you won’t want to throw against the wall. Photo: Ryan Whitwam

Flaws but not dealbreakers: It’s exceptional for the price, but the Nokia 2.3 is as cheap as it is for a reason (or several). For starters, its budget processor is easily bogged down when you’re running heavy apps and games and switching between apps or browser tabs, and its 13-megapixel camera is slow to focus and takes mediocre photos in anything less than broad daylight. It also lacks any kind of fingerprint sensor, contactless payment support, or water resistance, and it uses an old, slow-charging Micro-USB port rather than the newer USB-C. It has only 32 GB of storage, though you can alleviate that somewhat with a microSD card. And like the Nokia 6.2, it supports only GSM phone networks such as AT&T’s or T-Mobile’s, not Verizon’s CDMA.
What to look forward to

Apple scheduled a product announcement event for October 13 (the start of Amazon’s Prime Day event). It’s widely expected that the company will announce a new line of iPhones, though details and availability dates are all unconfirmed. If there’s any relevant news, we’ll update this space with our initial impressions of how it might impact the decision to buy an iPhone 11 or SE, and we’ll get to testing any new phones once they’re available.