Following a bit of a false start with the original Fold last year, Samsung has hit a home run in its second attempt to make cutting-edge folding phone-tablets a reality – as the Galaxy Z Fold 2 is something really quite special.

The new device costs £1,799, which makes it a super luxury purchase. Make no mistake, this is absolutely not a smartphone for the masses, but it is a very important device.

It follows the success of the Galaxy Z Flip phone launched in February, which introduced two key things: ultra-thin glass for the flexible screen and a laptop-like hinge that could hold itself open at a variety of angles.

Four months of solid use of the Z Flip proved that the troubles plaguing the original Fold could be solved.
Samsung Galaxy Z Fold 2 review
The metal body, glass front and back, and smooth-opening hinge feel every bit as premium as they should for £1,799. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs/The Guardian

Everything about the Z Fold 2 is better made than the original. It is still bleeding-edge technology, but it looks, works and feels like an ultra-premium device actually worth the best part of £2,000, not a prototype.

The Z Fold 2 is a two-in-one device unlike anything else on the market. When folded, it is a chunky but regular smartphone with a long, thin display on the outside. Open it up like a book and you’ve got a tablet that’s about the same size as Apple’s popular iPad Mini.

The outside screen is crisp, bright and useful for the sorts of things you use a smartphone for: messaging, checking the weather, quick Google searches, loading Spotify playlists and checking the Premier League scores.
Samsung Galaxy Z Fold 2 review
If you’re coming from a big-screen phone the keyboard will feel cramped, but it is only a few millimetres narrower than an iPhone SE, so I quickly got used to it. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs/The Guardian

It is easy to hold with lots of edge to grip. In two weeks of use not once did I feel I could drop the phone using it in one or two hands despite weighing a not inconsiderable 282g – Samsung’s massive Galaxy Note 20 Ultra only weighs 208g, while Apple’s iPhone 11 Pro Max weighs 226g.

After using hand-stretching big phones for years, using the Z Fold 2 when folded was surprisingly refreshing and its thickness wasn’t a problem fitting it in jeans or jacket pockets.

But for those things that demand a big screen, you simply unfold it and away you go. The inside display is fantastic; big, bright, colour-rich and crisp. It runs at 120Hz, which eliminates any potential problems around scrolling lag. A selfie-camera pokes through the screen at 25mm in from the right edge and blends into the background just fine.

The crease in the middle of the screen is a compromise necessary to have it fold in half. While you can see it when the screen is off or with glare on the screen at certain angles, it totally disappears when you’re actually using it.
Samsung Galaxy Z Fold 2 review
You can feel the crease when you run your finger over it, but it is in a position you barely ever will and feels smooth and uniform when you do. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs/The Guardian

The screen is made of ultra-thin glass, but that glass is sandwiched between multiple layers of hi-tech adhesive and plastic, including a screen protector on top that is replaceable by a service centre. It feels solid like glass when you tap or run your finger over it, but just like any common plastic screen protector it can be marked by a nail if you try and is ultimately softer and less durable than a traditional glass display.

There are two zoom modes available for the inner screen. By default it acts like a blown up phone screen making everything bigger, but I switched it to the tablet mode, which made text, icons and the user interface smaller so you could fit more on screen at once.

In this mode some apps give you more than one pane similar to a tablet or desktop layout, such as showing a list of emails on the left and the current open email on the right.

The back is frosted glass with an attractive camera lump that looks like the Note 20 Ultra but only sticks out about half as far. The bronze colour, as tested here, varies between looking purply brown in some lights to matt pink in others.