If you do already have a specific budget in mind, you should check out our best mid-range smartphones and best budget smartphones round ups. There are plenty of affordable devices to choose from these days, so we’ve sorted through them all to present you with the best value phones so you can get you the most bang for your buck.  Alternatively, if you like to snap pics on your smartphone, our best camera phone guide offers a detailed breakdown of all the best camera phones 2020 has to offer.

Of course, cutting-edge smartphones are announced throughout the year, so this list could change with any new phone release. Make sure to bookmark this page and check back again before you settle on your next upgrade, to avoid missing out on the latest and greatest the phone world has to offer. Apple’s annual iPhone 12 and iPhone 12 Pro announcement is just around the corner, and could very well knock one of these handsets off its pedestal. As of right now, the phones in this list are the absolute best this year has to offer. Keep reading to find out more.

1. Oppo Find X2 Pro

The Oppo Find X2 Pro is the king of 2020

Pros:

    Cheaper than the pro
    Sharp, punchy screen
    Class-leading fast charging

Cons:

    Expensive
    No wireless charging.

The Oppo Find X2 Pro is a real rival to Samsung Galaxy S20 series for the crown of best Android phone and it’s currently the best phone you can buy. 

The Snapdragon 865 makes for a seriously fast phone, while the 120Hz OLED is a joy to behold. Battery life is excellent too and the ridiculously fast 65w charging makes up for the lack of Qi wireless charging. There’s 5G too.

The screen on the Find X2 Pro is a stand-out feature and the phone’s primary camera featuring Sony’s new 12-bit IMX689 sensor with a large 1/1.4” size and 1.12-micron pixels. The 13MP periscope camera offers up a 10x hybrid zoom and a 60x digital zoom.

    Read our full Oppo X2 Pro review

homescreen of the iphone 11
2. iPhone 11 Pro

The iPhone 11 Pro offers Apple’s best-ever image quality

Pros:

    A lovely, supremely bright display
    One of the best camera systems on any phone
    Includes a quick charger in the box

Cons:

    Design hasn’t changed much and the notch remains annoying
    64GB is still the base storage option
    The iPhone 11 is a better pick for most people

Glitzier, flashier and far more expensive than the iPhone 11, the iPhone 11 Pro sits at the top of Apple’s current phone line-up along with its larger iPhone 11 Pro Max sibling – at least it does until the iPhone 12 launch later this year. For the extra cash you get a Super Retina XDR display, a triple-camera array on the back and higher-end materials. So is this enough to warrant the now overused Pro tag?

Apple has seriously improved its photographic output with the iPhone 11 Pro – and, in many ways, with the iPhone 11 – which now holds its own among the best phone cameras out there. Packing three distinct 12-megapixel cameras, the iPhone 11 Pro is the first iPhone to feature an ultra-wide-angle lens (13mm equivalent, f/2.4). You also get a standard lens (26mm, f/1.8) and a 2x telephoto lens (52mm, with an improved maximum aperture of f/2.0).

The video recording, audio and super-bright XDR display are all tremendous, and the iPhone 11 Pro is also an absolute performance beast. The new A13 Bionic chipset helps put it up there with the fastest phones we’ve reviewed. This is also the first 5.8-inch iPhone that doesn’t feel hamstrung by a battery which needs constant attention to get it through a full day.

Related: Best iPhone Deals

Downsides include the meagre amounts of base storage, the speed of the refresh display and Apple’s resistance to fully embracing USB-C. The idea of being able to charge the MacBook Pro, iPad Pro and iPhone 11 Pro with the same block and charger just makes so much sense.

The iPhone 11 Pro offers many improvements over its predecessor, but there are still areas that Apple could have pushed forward in, especially as it has now decided to label these phones as Pro. 5G was never going to happen but would have been nice anyway and other notable omissions include some sort of Touch ID-enabled fingerprint sensor inside the display and the rumoured reverse wireless charging, which could have juiced up a pair of AirPods.

It’s worth bearing in mind that the iPhone 12 could be set to land towards the end of this year. There is no confirmed release date yet, but many commentators are expecting a September release. So, if you want the latest and greatest iPhone, it might be worth hanging fire for now.

    Read our iPhone 11 Pro review

3. Samsung Galaxy S20 Plus

The best Android phone you can buy right now

Pros:

    Nice design
    Great screen
    Strong performance
    Good battery

Cons:

    Ugly UI
    8K video recording is pointless

The Samsung Galaxy S20 and S20 Plus are the best Android phones you can buy right now. They are both smaller than the Ultra, making them easier to handle, but still have large immersive screens that boasts an incredible refresh rate and an enviable sharpness.

The cameras are also sharp and detailed and have less of the lurid post-processing that affected previous Samsung flagships.

The punchy performance was of a very high standard, only coming up short in comparison to the iPhone 11 Pro, and could handle everything we threw at it (though it broke a sweat undertaking 8K video recording).

Battery life is generally impressive and will comfortably last you a full day – unless, that is, you opt for the high 120Hz refresh rate, which takes a big bite out of the battery. In this case, even a moderate usage will see you needing a top-up before the end of the day.

One of the few things we didn’t take much of a shine to was Samsung’s user interface, which is quite a departure from standard Android and might take you some time to get used to.

If you’re looking into buying a Samsung Galaxy S20, it’s worth bearing in mind that the S30 could be just around the corner. Take a look at the latest info on the S30 in our rumour and news round-up, here.

    Read our full Samsung Galaxy S20 Plus review
    Read our full Samsung Galaxy S20 review

oneplus8pro front
4. OnePlus 8 Pro

The first OnePlus flagship that doesn’t compromise

Pros:

    Gorgeous 120Hz display
    Improved ultra wide camera
    Clean software
    Very fast charging and now wireless charging too

Cons:

    It’s a very big phone

With the OnePlus 8 Pro, OnePlus has finally made a flagship-worthy device. For the first time, there aren’t any obvious sacrifices here – Qi charging and an IP68 rating finally make an appearance – which makes the £799 price even more impressive. Yes, it is pricier than OnePlus phones of years gone, but it’s far more affordable than similar devices from the likes of Samsung and Oppo.

The star of the show is the 6.78-inch OLED display, which has a 120Hz refresh rate and a QHD+ resolution. It’s smooth, seriously bright and oh so crisp. However, if you want to get the most from that 4510mAh battery, then you’ll probably want to keep the resolution at FHD+.

Like all OnePlus phones, the 8 Pro has all the latest tech inside. There’s a 5G-capable Snapdragon 865 running the show, with either 8 or 12GB RAM. Four cameras sit on the back, including a very impressive 48-megapixel ultra-wide and a less impressive colour filter sensor, while a 16-megapixel version sits on the front. There’s no mechanical pop-up this time around, with the selfie camera housed in a very small cutout.

Warp Charge remains to get you to 50% charge in about 30 minutes, and there’s Warp Charge wireless too, which is just as fast if you’re using the brand’s own wireless pad.

Our biggest criticism is the slightly uncomfortable body, which isn’t helped by the overly sloping display and massive overall footprint. Bunging on a case does help the situation somewhat.

With a price that’s lower than the competition and just about every feature going, the OnePlus 8 Pro deserves its spot as one of the best phones available right now.

    Read our full OnePlus 8 Pro review

 
iPhone 11 camera
5. iPhone 11

An excellent camera, a great price and strong battery life make this a clear winner for best iPhone

Pros:

    Great camera
    Long-lasting battery
    Really nice colour options
    Surprisingly excellent value for an Apple phone

Cons:

    A screen resolution bump would have been nice
    Still no fast charger in the box

The iPhone 11 is the natural successor to the ridiculously popular iPhone XR and sits below the more expensive iPhone 11 Pro and iPhone 11 Pro Max in Apple’s current phone line-up.

You could think of it as an iPhone XRS: it takes the previous phone, leaves the design virtually unchanged and alters the internals. For example, there are now two cameras on the back and the same A13 chipset as the Pro model. Most surprisingly, the iPhone 11 costs less than the outgoing model: at £729/$699 for the 64GB base as opposed to £749/$749, this could be the best-value iPhone yet.

The 11 offers the best size of any iPhone. There’s more screen to play with than on the 11 Pro, but the phone doesn’t feel overly bulky or heavy. In terms of battery life, the iPhone 11 is a really long-lasting phone that we found went slightly further than its predecessor on a single charge.

The new rear cameras are also excellent. The iPhone 11 is much more affordable than the Pro models but boasts exactly the same wide-angle 12-megapixel optical image stabilised (OIS) main sensor with an f/1.8 aperture and the same 12-megapixel ultra-wide-angle camera (f/2.4).

The only thing you’re missing out on is the Pro’s 2x optical zoom telephoto camera, but if you’d take ultra-wide-angle over zoom, you might well see this as a fair trade – it’s hard to see any differences when comparing photos from the Pro and the 11.

The 6.1-inch Liquid Retina LCD, however, falls below the competition in terms of resolution and it would have been nice to see the 1792 x 828 panel upgraded to a 1080p version.

Also less than impressive is the 5W charger included in the box. The omission of a fast charger is clearly a cost-cutting measure and remains a significant negative aspect of this phone. The charger provided has always felt slow and this is even more obvious now that the iPhone 11 Pro models come with an 18W charger.

Overall, if you’re updating an older iPhone then you’ll notice the vast array of improvements to camera, battery life and design straight away. This is a great buy that’ll hopefully perform comfortably for a number of years.

    Read our iPhone 11 review

Realme X50 5G
6. Realme X50 5G

A stunning price for a 5G workhorse

Pros:

    Very good battery life
    Low price for a 5G phone
    Well-specced 120Hz screen
    Strong general and gaming performance
    Surprisingly capable main camera, even at night
    Glass back

Cons: 

    Two of the rear cameras are filler
    No headphone jack

From OnePlus to Google’s budget range, good phones are now cheap and cheap phones (with some exceptions) are good. The Realme X50 5G might be the epitome of this notion.

For under £300, the X50 5G packs in the latest connectivity tech, an impressive 120Hz screen, strong performance and great battery life. Realme has managed to plug a ton of flagship features into a phone that, in some cases, is a quarter of the price.

You may think the design is an area that’s had to be sacrificed to save some dosh but, with the X50 5G, you get a curved glass back and an overall phone build that fits in perfectly well with higher-priced modern smartphones.

    Read our Realme X50 5G review

iphone SE 2 back
7. iPhone SE 2 (2020)

Best value iPhone

Pros:

    Oh so fast
    Great daylight camera
    All the benefits of iOS
    Fast ToucID sensor

Cons:

    Boring design
    Battery life merely ‘OK’

Yes, the iPhone SE 2 looks familiar. It borrows design from phones that have been around for years and it does look a tad old-fashioned compared to the mid-range Android options that have ditched the bezel. Yet, it’s a real pleasure to use.

It uses the same chipset as the iPhone 11 and as a result, is very fast. It packs a great camera too, and extras like Qi wireless charging, a very colour accurate screen and an IP67 rating.

If you’re after an iPhone experience without breaking the bank then this is the best choice around.

    Read our full iPhone SE 2 review

Samsung Galaxy S20 FE
8. Samsung Galaxy S20 FE

A spec beast

Pros:

    Great display
    120Hz
    Nice colours

Cons:

    Design a little bland

The Samsung Galaxy S20 FE is a more affordable entry in the brand’s flagship range, however it does a good job balancing its performance and feature set to make a really attractive proposition.

Headline features include a really nice 1080p 120Hz 6.5-inch display without annoying curved sides. There’s also 5G support, a beefy 4500mAh battery, expandable storage and three cameras on the back to give you varied shots. Samsung has also decided against ditching features like Qi charging and an IP rating for water resistance.

There are two models of the S20 FE available. One packs the Exynos 990 chipset and tops out at 4G, while the one we reviewed is 5G and packs the superior Snapdragon 865 chipset. We found the battery life here was far superior, so if you can spare the extra cash it’s the one worth plumping for.

Even though there is plastic on the back rather than glass, the S20 FE still looks good and feels enough like a high-end device. We’re also big fans of the wide variety of colours, which include red, blue and a minty green.

    Read our full Samsung Galaxy FE review

9. Motorola Edge

Best for curves

Pros:

    5G
    Great display
    Lovely, sleek design

Cons:

    The curved screen can be annoying

It’s important not to get the Motorola Edge confused with the Motorola Edge Plus. While the latter is a high-end and very expensive device, the Edge is more mid-range – and all the better for it.

The Motorola Edge competes with the OnePlus 8 for best mid-range device and while OnePlus 8 just pips it, there is still a lot to like here. From the 5G chip to the OLED HDR panel, this is a phone punching above its weight. It has three good rear cameras, multi-day battery life and Motorola’s clean software.

Our main issue is the curved display, which can be slightly irritating with accidental presses being very common.

    Read our full Motorola Edge review

 
10. Samsung Galaxy Note 20 Ultra

A big phone powerhouse that looks stunning and takes great photos

Pros:

    Bronze colour is really nice, and adds a matte finish
    S Pen even more responsive than ever
    Really good triple camera
    The best looking phone around

Cons:

    Battery life, on Exynos version, isn’t good
    Screen resolution limits are annoying

Samsung is almost carving out a market of its own with its “Ultra”-ultra-premium device. These supercharged devices come with a hefty priced tag but are loaded with the best features that Android phones have to often.

The garguant Note 20 Ultra is one of these devices, sporting a 6.9-inch 120Hz Adaptive Refresh Rate OLED display. The display is indeed big and it’s gorgeous. Alongside the stunning screen. you get that ultra-premium glass sandwich design with a new Mystic Bronze colour option as well as the best processor from Exynos or Qualcomm depending on your location.

Samsung has toned the camera down a bit for the Note 20 Ultra, reducing the frankly silly 100x Space Zoom from the Galaxy S20 Ultra down to 50x. The triple camera setup provides truly impressive results.

    Read our Samsung Galaxy Note 20 Ultra review

11. Google Pixel 4a

Google’s antidote for the £1000 smartphone – and a clean experience with a corking camera to boot

Pros:

    Great camera
    Refreshingly small size for an Android phone
    The promise of fast updates
    Nice, sharp OLED screen
    Affordable

Cons:

    You’ll find competition with far larger spec sheets and feature lists
    Some mild performance and touch latency hiccups
    As well as being a Pro, the small screen might put some off

Google shook up the market with the Pixel 3a, especially in the US where mid-range Chinese offerings are much less prominent, offering a flagship quality camera and sleek UI experience for a modest price.

Now, Google is back with the Pixel 4a and, for fans of the previous model, it’s good news as it’s more of the same. Pixel 4a is a cracking sub-£400 phone that offers a great camera, a wonderful throwback to a more pocket-friendly size of phone and a shiny stock Android experience.

The screen isn’t half bad either, with Google managed to squeeze a pleasingly sharp OLED at this low price point. Another goody is Google’s promise of three years of fast updates for the Pixel 4a, meaning you’ll always be on the latest and greatest that Android has to offer.

If you are looking for a more premium Google experience then the new Pixel 5 and Pixel 4a 5G have just been revealed. You can expect our full reviews soon.

    Read our Google Pixel 4a review

12. Huawei P40 Pro Plus

The best camera phone – with a big problem

Pros:

    The best zoom camera. Ever.
    Just great pictures all around
    Lovely display

Cons: 

    The lack of Google and everything that comes with it
    Very expensive

The Huawei P40 Pro Plus should be much higher up on this list. It should really be competing with the best of what Samsung, Apple, Oppo and OnePlus have to offer.

You won’t find a better camera on any phone and the zooming capabilities here put both the Samsung Galaxy S20 Ultra and Oppo Find X2 to shame. You can really see detail on objects and animals when you’re at 10x. It’s a fast phone too, with the Kirin 990 chipset still competing with the best out there and offering 5G too.

You’ve also got a lovely screen that curves softly at the top, a sleek design and impressive battery life. Huawei remains one of the best when it comes to fast charging and you can juice up the Pro Plus very quickly.

But, and this is the reason the P40 Pro Plus is hard to recommend to absolutely everybody, the lack of Google services is a pain. Huawei’s done an ok job so far at padding out its App Gallery and offering easy ways of downloading APKs, but while many apps still use the basic services provided by Google there will be missing spots. No Uber, no HD Netflix and no mobile payment solution are all irritants that will likely put a lot of people off.

    Read our full Huawei P40 Pro Plus review

13. Moto G8

The best cheap phone

Pros:

    Affordable
    Packed with features
    Nice design

Cons: 

    Screen is far from the best, even for the price

A lot of the phones on this list are expensive, flagship options. If you want to a budget phone that still gets the job done impressively well then we’d suggest the Moto G8.

it has a good camera, clean software and fast performance. It looks nice too and is a comfortable, if large, phone to grip on to. Our biggest qualm is the display, which could use a few more pixels to really help it pop.

    Read our full Moto G8 review

14. OnePlus Nord

Best budget gaming phone

Pros:

    Great quality OLED panel
    Very quick charging
    Lovely version of Android
    Nice, ergonomic design
    5G and great performance

Cons: 

    Screen seems to mark very easily
    Secondary cameras are pretty much useless

The Nord might not be marketed as a gaming handset, but the OnePlus mid-ranger is packed full of features that lend themselves to mobile gamers. The Snapdragon 765G SoC offers great performance despite not being a flagship chip, and the 90Hz OLED display ensures the image is both sharp and fluid. Multitasking is further boosted by the 8GB and 12GB RAM options.

While there are better camera’s on the market, fast charging, 5G compatability and an affordable price make the Nord a budget smartphone to be reckoned with.